Chapter 1
Go down deep enough into anything and you will find mathematics.
-  Dean Schlicler
If you don't believe mathematics is simple, it is only because you don’t 
realize how complicated life is. 
- John von Neumann
To ask the right question is harder than to answer it. - Georg Cantor
Learning is a treasure that follows its owner. 
- Chinese Proverb
A Taste of Discrete Mathematics
1: Wheting the appetite: epidemics; speed-dating; and, friendship networks.
Discrete m athem atics deals w ith “objects th a t we count.” W hen you cook your favorite Thai dish, you perform 
“discrete” steps in a sequence. We can count those steps. W hen delegates sit at a banquet, each “discrete” 
delegate sits at a single “discrete” seat. Processes th a t take place in well defined steps, involving objects that 
come in indivisible units are the focus of discrete m athem atics. The most famous discrete object is the digital 
com puter which executes instructions in sequential steps and uses a discrete scratch-paper called RAM to 
store interm ediate results during its calculations. If th a t is not enough reason to study the subject, then for 
beauty’s sake do it. Let us begin w ith some examples of discrete m athem atics in the real world.
1.1 
M odeling Epidemics
O utbreaks of a deadly virus EBOLA recur every now and then. The nam e of the virus is 
not im portant. People live on a grid, think of a chess board w ith only white squares. Each 
grid square is a person. Adjacent squares th a t share a side are neighbors. Initially, some 
people are infected, in gray. Infection is perm anent and if at least two of your neighbors 
are infected today, then tom orrow  you will be infected. W ho will ultim ately get infected? 
For example, will the square shaded red eventually get infected on the 7 x 7  grid shown? 
Let us tinker. Tinkering is an essential part of discrete m athem atics. So. starting from 
the initial gray infections, let’s see how the infection spreads over a few days. On each 
day, the previous infections are in black and the new infections are in gray.
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
day 1
day 2
day 3
day 4
day 5
dav 6
day 7
day 8
P o p  Q uiz 1.1
Continue to tinker with the epidemic spread above. Does the red square eventually get infected?
The epidemic spread is indeed a discrete process. People are either infected or not. Time is discretized into 
days. We identified the actors as people living on a grid and the process dynamics -  at least two of youi 
neighbors m ust be infected to infect you. These are modeling assum ptions. Modeling assum ptions are critical, 
and you may argue w ith them . People may not live on a grid. Perhaps one neighbor being infected suffices to 
infect you. A good model is more likely to give correct conclusions. The beginning of a discrete m athem atical 
analysis is always a model of the phenom enon you are analyzing. In our case, the model was a 2-contact
